Update zha.markdown with tips on improving Zigbee network range (#15789)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_integrations/zha.markdown

The custom quirks implementations for zigpy implemented as ZHA Device Handlers for Home Assistant are a similar concept to that of [Hub-connected Device Handlers for the SmartThings Classics platform](https://docs.smartthings.com/en/latest/device-type-developers-guide/) as well as that of [Zigbee-Herdsman Converters (formerly Zigbee-Shepherd Converters) as used by Zigbee2mqtt](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/how_tos/how_to_support_new_devices.html), meaning they are each virtual representations of a physical device that expose additional functionality that is not provided out-of-the-box by the existing integration between these platforms.

### Improving Zigbee network range

> One of the more commonly asked questions is in regards to improving or extending signal reception/transmission or resolving problems with poor link quality. The fact is that bad signal reception can be due to many different things and experienced Zigbee users in the community will normally advise that there are a few simple fundamental things that you should really attemt to do first in order to better optimize your Zigbee devices equipment which can resolve many basic problems related to signal strength or interferance issues. There are always exceptions however if possible to try follow at least some of these general recommendations before you take more advanced steps like reporting issues to developers and submitting debug logs. Just following these simple tips should help improve signal strength and reduce signal interference which can normally many problems with a Zigbee network. 

Reviewer: Try splitting this into multiple paragraphs. Long paragraphs like this, are hard to read.

Author: Done.

2. Utilize a USB extension cable to move Zigbee coordinator adapter and place your Zigbee coordinator adapter in a sensible position, away from WiFi access-points/routers or other sources of 2.4GHz signals in a location that it is relatively free from strong signal interference. The best location will depend on your building's floorplan though normally you want to place it somewhere in the middle. Building materials are also very relative as example dense/thick concrete, bricks, masonry, etc. dampen will all wireless signals and therefore it is best to place your Zigbee coordinator adapter some distance from walls, ceilings and floors. You could also try different orientation of your Zigbee antenna (or your whole Zigbee coordinator adapter if it has an internal antenna). This is because the connection between the Zigbee coordinator radio and your other devices also depends on the way the antenna oriented in space. Note! A bad USB extension cable may lead to connection issues between the system and the Zigbee coordinator adapter, symptoms of this are disconnection messages.

> 3. Check your WiFi access-points/routers channels in use to see if your router/access point is overlapping the channel your Zigbee network is using. If so change the channel of the access-points/routers and lock it. It will normally be easier than changing the channel of your Zigbee network and then you will have to re-join/re-pair all of your Zigbee devices. A busy WiFi access-points/routers that are operating the same frequency range (overlapping channels) as your Zigbee coordinator will drown out the Zigbee traffic, and even more so if they are located close to each other. See this article for WiFi and Zigbee channel s overlapping frequency ranges -> https://www.metageek.com/training/resources/zigbee-wifi-coexistence.html

Reviewer: Do not use bare URLs in Markdown.

Author: Done.

Author: Done.

The custom quirks implementations for zigpy implemented as ZHA Device Handlers for Home Assistant are a similar concept to that of [Hub-connected Device Handlers for the SmartThings Classics platform](https://docs.smartthings.com/en/latest/device-type-developers-guide/) as well as that of [Zigbee-Herdsman Converters (formerly Zigbee-Shepherd Converters) as used by Zigbee2mqtt](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/how_tos/how_to_support_new_devices.html), meaning they are each virtual representations of a physical device that expose additional functionality that is not provided out-of-the-box by the existing integration between these platforms.

### Improving Zigbee network range

> Low signal quality can lead to transmission errors and related issues. This section has a list of fundamental tips how to improve signal quality. Improving signal quality also maximizes range and resolves most problems related to transmission errors. Please try to follow at least some of this recommendation before posting on the community forums or reporting issues to developers and submitting debug logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Low signal quality can lead to transmission errors and related issues. This section has a list of fundamental tips on how to improve signal quality. Improving signal quality also maximizes range and resolves most problems related to transmission errors. Please try to follow at least some of these recommendations before posting on the community forums or reporting issues to developers and submitting debug logs.
```

> 1. Add more Zigbee routers between devices far away and the next closest router. Distribute more Zigbee routers in areas with poor reception. Zigbee network topology uses a "mesh network" design which means that each device that acts as a Zigbee router will extend the range of your Zigbee network as a whole. While there are exceptions, almost all permanently powered devices serve as a Zigbee router. Adding more permanently powered Zigbee devices allows to get better coverage. There are also dedicated Zigbee routers which you can [find by doing a community search for "Zigbee signal repeater" or "Zigbee range extender"](https://community.home-assistant.io/t/advice-on-zigbee-range-extending/175882/)). Devices that can not act as routers are typically battery operated and known as "end devices". Some end device have issues connecting through routers (e.g. Xiaomi/Aqara devices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add more Zigbee routers between devices far away and the next closest router. Distribute more Zigbee routers in areas with poor reception. Zigbee network topology uses a "mesh network" design which means that each device that acts as a Zigbee router will extend the range of your Zigbee network as a whole. While there are exceptions, almost all permanently powered devices serve as a Zigbee router. Adding more permanently powered Zigbee devices allows getting better coverage. There are also dedicated Zigbee routers which you can [find by doing a community search for "Zigbee signal repeater" or "Zigbee range extender"](https://community.home-assistant.io/t/advice-on-zigbee-range-extending/175882/)). Devices that can not act as routers are typically battery-operated and known as "end devices". Some end devices have issues connecting through routers (e.g. Xiaomi/Aqara devices).
```

> 2. Use a USB extension cable. This allows to position the Zigbee coordinator adapter for better signal quality. Position the Zigbee coordinator away from WiFi access-points/routers or other sources of 2.4GHz signals to avoid signal interference. The best location depends on your building's floorplan. Ideally you want to place the Zigbee coordinator somewhere in the middle. Building materials do influence signal quality too, as example dense/thick concrete, bricks, masonry, etc. dampen all wireless signals. Place the Zigbee coordinator with some distance from walls, ceilings and floors. Also try different orientation of your Zigbee antenna (or your whole Zigbee coordinator adapter if it has an internal antenna). Some Antennas have a stronger signal in certain direction. Simply changing orientation can improve signal quality already. Note: A bad USB extension cable may lead to connection issues between the system and the Zigbee coordinator adapter, symptoms of this are disconnection messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use a USB extension cable. This allows positioning the Zigbee coordinator adapter for better signal quality. Position the Zigbee coordinator away from Wi-Fi access-points/routers or other sources of 2.4GHz signals to avoid signal interference. The best location depends on your building's floorplan. Ideally, you want to place the Zigbee coordinator somewhere in the middle. Building materials do influence signal quality too, for example, dense/thick concrete, bricks, masonry, etc. dampen all wireless signals. Place the Zigbee coordinator with some distance from walls, ceilings and floors. Also, try different orientations of your Zigbee antenna (or your whole Zigbee coordinator adapter if it has an internal antenna). Some Antennas have a stronger signal in a certain direction. Simply changing orientation can improve signal quality already. Note: A bad USB extension cable may lead to connection issues between the system and the Zigbee coordinator adapter, symptoms of this are disconnection messages.
```

> 3. Zigbee and WiFi can operate on various channels in the 2.4GHz spectrum. A busy WiFi access-points/routers that is operating in the same frequency range (overlapping channels) as your Zigbee coordinator will drown out the Zigbee traffic, especially if they are located close to each other. To avoid interference between Zigbee and WiFi try to choose channels without overlap. Check the channel your WiFi access-points/routers is using (either by checking on the routers web interface or using a WiFi analyzer app). The Zigbee channel is currently not shown in the Home Assistant front-end but you can find the channel in the logs (watch out for Network parameters log entry with the channel number, e.g. `radioChannel=15`). Changing the channel of the Zigbee network needs recreating it and re-join/re-pair all of your Zigbee devices. Typically its a lot easier to change the channel used by your WiFi. See [this article for WiFi and Zigbee channels coexistance](https://www.metageek.com/training/resources/zigbee-wifi-coexistence.html) to avoid using overlapping frequency ranges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Zigbee and Wi-Fi can operate on various channels in the 2.4GHz spectrum. A busy Wi-Fi access-points/routers that are operating in the same frequency range (overlapping channels) as your Zigbee coordinator will drown out the Zigbee traffic, especially if they are located close to each other. To avoid interference between Zigbee and Wi-Fi try to choose channels without overlap. Check the channel your Wi-Fi access-points/routers are using (either by checking on the router's web interface or using a Wi-Fi analyzer app). The Zigbee channel is currently not shown in the Home Assistant front-end but you can find the channel in the logs (watch out for Network parameters log entry with the channel number, e.g., `radioChannel=15`). Changing the channel of the Zigbee network needs recreating it and re-join/re-pair all of your Zigbee devices. Typically it's a lot easier to change the channel used by your Wi-Fi. See [this article for Wi-Fi and Zigbee channels coexistance](https://www.metageek.com/training/resources/zigbee-wifi-coexistence.html) to avoid using overlapping frequency ranges.
```

4. Update the firmware on your Zigbee coordinator adapter and your Zigbee devices. Note that depending on your hardware the latest Zigbee coordinator firmware might not always be the one recommended by the community so it is advised to ask before upgrading.

> 5. If your Zigbee coordinator adapter has a removable antenna (e.g. with an SMA-connector) then you have the option of using a high-gain antenna. Note that antennas with higher gain have directionality: You might have better reception on the same floor, but reception across floors might suffer. In addition, you also have the option to use an antenna extension-cable if needed (usually using just a USB extension cable for your Zigbee coordinator adapter is the better alternative). This should really only be needed if you are trying to cover a long distance, like to another building or very dense/thick walls, ceilings and floors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If your Zigbee coordinator adapter has a removable antenna (e.g., with an SMA-connector) then you have the option of using a high-gain antenna. Note that antennas with higher gain have directionality: You might have better reception on the same floor, but reception across floors might suffer. In addition, you also have the option to use an antenna extension-cable if needed (usually using just a USB extension cable for your Zigbee coordinator adapter is the better alternative). This should really only be needed if you are trying to cover a long distance, like to another building or very dense/thick walls, ceilings and floors.
```

The custom quirks implementations for zigpy implemented as ZHA Device Handlers for Home Assistant are a similar concept to that of [Hub-connected Device Handlers for the SmartThings Classics platform](https://docs.smartthings.com/en/latest/device-type-developers-guide/) as well as that of [Zigbee-Herdsman Converters (formerly Zigbee-Shepherd Converters) as used by Zigbee2mqtt](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/how_tos/how_to_support_new_devices.html), meaning they are each virtual representations of a physical device that expose additional functionality that is not provided out-of-the-box by the existing integration between these platforms.

### Improving Zigbee network range

> Low signal quality can lead to transmission errors and related issues. This section has a list of tips to improve signal quality which maximizes range and resolves most problems related to transmission errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Low signal quality can lead to transmission errors and related issues. This section has a list of fundamental tips how to improve signal quality. Improving signal quality also maximizes range and resolves most problems related to transmission errors. Please try to follow at least some of this recommendation before posting on the community forums or reporting issues to developers and submitting debug logs.
```

The custom quirks implementations for zigpy implemented as ZHA Device Handlers for Home Assistant are a similar concept to that of [Hub-connected Device Handlers for the SmartThings Classics platform](https://docs.smartthings.com/en/latest/device-type-developers-guide/) as well as that of [Zigbee-Herdsman Converters (formerly Zigbee-Shepherd Converters) as used by Zigbee2mqtt](https://www.zigbee2mqtt.io/how_tos/how_to_support_new_devices.html), meaning they are each virtual representations of a physical device that expose additional functionality that is not provided out-of-the-box by the existing integration between these platforms.

### Improving Zigbee network range

> One of the more commonly asked questions about using Zigbee with Home Assistant are regarding to improving or extending signal reception/transmission or resolving problems with poor link quality, thus here are gathered a few possible options to resolve most problems related to range extension. 

Reviewer 2: I'd avoid introduction about commonly asked questions etc. Get right into it: 

```suggestion
Low signal quality can lead to transmission errors and related issues. This section has a list of tips to improve signal quality which maximizes range and resolves most problems related to transmission errors.
```

> The fact is that bad signal reception can be due to many different things and experienced Zigbee users in the community will normally advise that there are a few simple fundamental things that you should really attemt to do first in order to better optimize your Zigbee devices equipment which can resolve many basic problems related to signal strength or interferance issues. Note that there are always exceptions, however, if possible to try follow at least some of these general recommendations before you take more advanced steps like reporting issues to developers and submitting debug logs.

Reviewer 2: This is a lot of words with not that much content... Is that paragraph needed? Maybe just adding that last sentence to the paragraph above is enough.

Author: Wrote this how I would like to have this topic explained if I was a beginner however please do suggest/make changes.

Reviewer 2: I moved the important content in the paragraph above (see new review below).

```suggestion
```

> Just following these simple tips below should help improve signal strength and reduce signal interference which can normally many problems with a Zigbee network.

Reviewer 2: That seems to end up to be quite similar to the first sentence, I think we can drop that too.

```suggestion
```

> 1. Add more Zigbee routers between the far away devices and the next nearest router, distributing more Zigbee routers around areas with poorer reception. Zigbee network topology uses a "mesh network" design which means that each device that acts as a Zigbee router will extend the range of your Zigbee network. While there are exceptions, as a rule of thumb, almost all permanently powered devices will serve as a router. This is a part of Zigbee design concept, simple add more powered permanently Zigbee devices to get better coverage, (there are purpose-specific Zigbee routers which you can [find by doing a community search for "Zigbee signal repeater" or "Zigbee range extender"](https://community.home-assistant.io/t/advice-on-zigbee-range-extending/175882/)). Devices that can not act as routers are known as "end devices" and you should know that some end device models from brands like Xiaomi/Aqara have issues connecting through routers.

Reviewer 2: > you should know that some end device models from brands like Xiaomi/Aqara have issues connecting through routers.

Interesting, but what should the user do with that information? Is that an advice to not buy Xiami/Aquara devices? Maybe add a link or something here?

Author: That specific comment is really only there to act as a warning to be aware that many Xiaomi/Aqara are known to have issues connecting through routers, so the magic bullet to range issues that are routers might not work on all Xiaomi/Aqara devices. 

That is, this is well known in the community  thought that new users with Xiaomi/Aqara devices with range issues should be aware that just adding any router will probably not magically solve all range issues that they have with Xiaomi/Aqara devices. 

There is a related link there already in the previous sentence to https://community.home-assistant.io/t/advice-on-zigbee-range-extending/175882/ which has further discussion and suggestions but thought I should not add the same link again. 

I could write a longer explanation of why this is the case with Xiaomi/Aqara devices but I do not think that I can not write a short explanation about what to do to resolve range issues with Xiaomi/Aqara devices, best is probably to ask in the forum.

Reviewer 2: I see. Some improvements suggestion:

```suggestion
1. Add more Zigbee routers between devices far away and the next closest router. Distribute more Zigbee routers in areas with poor reception. Zigbee network topology uses a "mesh network" design which means that each device that acts as a Zigbee router will extend the range of your Zigbee network as a whole. While there are exceptions, almost all permanently powered devices serve as a Zigbee router. Adding more permanently powered Zigbee devices allows to get better coverage. There are also dedicated Zigbee routers which you can [find by doing a community search for "Zigbee signal repeater" or "Zigbee range extender"](https://community.home-assistant.io/t/advice-on-zigbee-range-extending/175882/)). Devices that can not act as routers are typically battery operated and known as "end devices". Some end device have issues connecting through routers (e.g. Xiaomi/Aqara devices).
```

> 2. Utilize a USB extension cable to move Zigbee coordinator adapter and place your Zigbee coordinator adapter in a sensible position, away from WiFi access-points/routers or other sources of 2.4GHz signals in a location that it is relatively free from strong signal interference. The best location will depend on your building's floorplan though normally you want to place it somewhere in the middle. Building materials are also very relative as example dense/thick concrete, bricks, masonry, etc. dampen will all wireless signals and therefore it is best to place your Zigbee coordinator adapter some distance from walls, ceilings and floors. You could also try different orientation of your Zigbee antenna (or your whole Zigbee coordinator adapter if it has an internal antenna). This is because the connection between the Zigbee coordinator radio and your other devices also depends on the way the antenna oriented in space. Note! A bad USB extension cable may lead to connection issues between the system and the Zigbee coordinator adapter, symptoms of this are disconnection messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Use a USB extension cable. This allows to position the Zigbee coordinator adapter for better signal quality. Position the Zigbee coordinator away from WiFi access-points/routers or other sources of 2.4GHz signals to avoid signal interference. The best location depends on your building's floorplan. Ideally you want to place the Zigbee coordinator somewhere in the middle. Building materials do influence signal quality too, as example dense/thick concrete, bricks, masonry, etc. dampen all wireless signals. Place the Zigbee coordinator with some distance from walls, ceilings and floors. Also try different orientation of your Zigbee antenna (or your whole Zigbee coordinator adapter if it has an internal antenna). Some Antennas have a stronger signal in certain direction. Simply changing orientation can improve signal quality already. Note: A bad USB extension cable may lead to connection issues between the system and the Zigbee coordinator adapter, symptoms of this are disconnection messages.
```

> 3. Check your WiFi access-points/routers channels in use to see if your router/access point is overlapping the channel your Zigbee network is using. If so change the channel of the access-points/routers and lock it. It will normally be easier than changing the channel of your Zigbee network and then you will have to re-join/re-pair all of your Zigbee devices. A busy WiFi access-points/routers that are operating the same frequency range (overlapping channels) as your Zigbee coordinator will drown out the Zigbee traffic, and even more so if they are located close to each other. See [this article for WiFi and Zigbee channels coexistance](https://www.metageek.com/training/resources/zigbee-wifi-coexistence.html) to avoid using overlapping frequency ranges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Zigbee and WiFi can operate on various channels in the 2.4GHz spectrum. A busy WiFi access-points/routers that is operating in the same frequency range (overlapping channels) as your Zigbee coordinator will drown out the Zigbee traffic, especially if they are located close to each other. To avoid interference between Zigbee and WiFi try to choose channels without overlap. Check the channel your WiFi access-points/routers is using (either by checking on the routers web interface or using a WiFi analyzer app). The Zigbee channel is currently not shown in the Home Assistant front-end but you can find the channel in the logs (watch out for Network parameters log entry with the channel number, e.g. `radioChannel=15`). Changing the channel of the Zigbee network needs recreating it and re-join/re-pair all of your Zigbee devices. Typically its a lot easier to change the channel used by your WiFi. See [this article for WiFi and Zigbee channels coexistance](https://www.metageek.com/training/resources/zigbee-wifi-coexistence.html) to avoid using overlapping frequency ranges.
```

4. Update the firmware on your Zigbee coordinator adapter and your Zigbee devices. Note that depending on your hardware the latest Zigbee coordinator firmware might not always be the one recommended by the community so it is advised to ask before upgrading.

> 5. If you Zigbee coordinator adapter a removable antenna with an SMA-connector then you have the option of buying a high-gain antenna as an upgrade. In addition, you also have the option to use an antenna extension-cable if needed (though for various reasons that is not a good alternative to only using a USB extension cable with your Zigbee coordinator adapter if possible). This should really only be needed if you are trying to cover a long distance, like to another building or very dense/thick walls, ceilings and floors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. If your Zigbee coordinator adapter has a removable antenna (e.g. with an SMA-connector) then you have the option of using a high-gain antenna. Note that antennas with higher gain have directionality: You might have better reception on the same floor, but reception across floors might suffer. In addition, you also have the option to use an antenna extension-cable if needed (usually using just a USB extension cable for your Zigbee coordinator adapter is the better alternative). This should really only be needed if you are trying to cover a long distance, like to another building or very dense/thick walls, ceilings and floors.
```
